#scdbook settitle(Beauty and the Beast)
#scdbook setauthor(Marie Le Prince de Beaumont)
#scdbook setpublished(1756)
#scdbook gutenbergprefix
#scdbook chapterbreak


There was once a very rich merchant, who had six children, three sons,
and three daughters; being a man of sense, he spared no cost for their
education, but gave them all kinds of masters.  His daughters were
extremely handsome, especially the youngest; when she was little, every
body admired her, and called her <i>The little Beauty</i>; so that, as
she grew up, she still went by the name of <i>Beauty</i>, which made her
sisters very jealous.  The youngest, as she was handsome, was also
better than her sisters.  The two eldest had a great deal of pride,
because they were rich.  They gave themselves ridiculous airs, and would
not visit other merchants' daughters, nor keep company with any but
persons of quality.  They went out every day upon parties of pleasure,
balls, plays, concerts, etc. and laughed at their youngest sister,
because she spent the greatest part of her time in reading good books.
As it was known that they were to have great fortunes, several eminent
merchants made their addresses to them; but the two eldest said they
would never marry, unless they could meet with a Duke, or an Earl at
least.  Beauty very civilly thanked them that courted her, and told them
she was too young yet to marry, but chose to stay with her father a few
years longer.

All at once the merchant lost his whole fortune, excepting a small
country-house at a great distance from town, and told his children, with
tears in his eyes, they most go there and work for their living.  The
two eldest answered, that they would not leave the town, for they had
several lovers, who they were sure would be glad to have them, though
they had no fortune; but in this they were mistaken, for their lovers
slighted and forsook them in their poverty.  As they were not beloved on
account of their pride, every body said, "they do not deserve to be
pitied, we are glad to see their pride humbled, let them go and give
themselves quality airs in milking the cows and minding their dairy.
But, (added they,) we are extremely concerned for Beauty, she was such a
charming, sweet-tempered creature, spoke so kindly to poor people, and
was of such an affable, obliging disposition." Nay, several gentlemen
would have married her, though they knew she had not a penny; but she
told them she could not think of leaving her poor father in his
misfortunes, but was determined to go along with him into the country to
comfort and attend him.  Poor Beauty at first was sadly grieved at the
loss of her fortune; "but, (she said to herself,) were I to cry ever so
much, that would not make things better, I must try to make myself happy
without a fortune." When they came to their country-house, the merchant
and his three sons applied themselves to husbandry and tillage; and
Beauty rose at four in the morning, and made haste to have the house
clean, and breakfast ready for the family.  In the beginning she found
it very difficult, for she had not been used to work as a servant; but
in less than two months she grew stronger and healthier than ever.
After she had done her work, she read, played on the harpsichord, or
else sung whilst she spun.  On the contrary, her two sisters did not
know how to spend their time; they got up at ten, and did nothing but
saunter about the whole day, lamenting the loss of their fine clothes
and acquaintance.  "Do but see our youngest sister, (said they one to
the other,) what a poor, stupid mean-spirited creature she is, to be
contented with such an unhappy situation." The good merchant was of a
quite different opinion; he knew very well that Beauty out-shone her
sisters, in her person as well as her mind, and admired her humility,
industry, and patience; for her sisters not only left her all the work
of the house to do, but insulted her every moment.

#scdbook comment [Illustration: Beauty Making the Family's Breakfast]

The family had lived about a year in this retirement, when the merchant
received a letter, with an account that a vessel, on board of which he
had effects, was safely arrived.  This news had liked to have turned the
heads of the two eldest daughters, who immediately flattered themselves
with the hopes of returning to town; for they were quite weary of a
country life; and when they saw their father ready to set out, they
begged of him to buy them new gowns, caps, rings, and all manner of
trifles; but Beauty asked for nothing, for she thought to herself, that
all the money her father was going to receive would scarce be sufficient
to purchase every thing her sisters wanted.  "What will you have,
Beauty?" said her father.  "Since you are so kind as to think of me,
(answered she,) be so kind as to bring me a rose, for as none grow
hereabouts, they are a kind of rarity."  Not that Beauty cared for a
rose, but she asked for something, lest she should seem by her example
to condemn her sisters' conduct, who would have said she did it only to
look particular.  The good man went on his journey; but when he came
there, they went to law with him about the merchandize, and after a
great deal of trouble and pains to no purpose, he came back as poor as
before.

He was within thirty miles of his own house, thinking on the pleasure he
should have in seeing his children again, when going through a large
forest he lost himself.  It rained and snowed terribly, besides, the
wind was so high, that it threw him twice off his horse; and night
coming on, he began to apprehend being either starved to death with cold
and hunger, or else devoured by the wolves, whom he heard howling all
around him, when, on a sudden, looking through a long walk of trees, he
saw a light at some distance, and going on a little farther, perceived
it came from a palace illuminated from top to bottom.  The merchant
returned God thanks for this happy discovery, and hasted to the palace;
but was greatly surprised at not meeting with anyone in the out-courts.
His horse followed him, and seeing a large stable open, went in, and
finding both hay and oats, the poor beast, who was almost famished, fell
to eating very heartily.  The merchant tied him up to the manger, and
walked towards the house, where he saw no one, but entering into a large
hall, he found a good fire, and a table plentifully set out, with but
one cover laid.  As he was wet quite through with the rain and snow, he
drew near the fire to dry himself.  "I hope, (said he,) the master of
the house, or his servants, will excuse the liberty I take; I suppose it
will not be long before some of them appear."

He waited a considerable time, till it struck eleven, and still nobody
came: at last he was so hungry that he could stay no longer, but took a
chicken and ate it in two mouthfuls, trembling all the while.  After
this, he drank a few glasses of wine, and growing more courageous, he
went out of the hall, and crossed through several grand apartments with
magnificent furniture, till he came into a chamber, which had an
exceeding good bed in it, and as he was very much fatigued, and it was
past midnight, he concluded it was best to shut the door, and go to bed.

It was ten the next morning before the merchant waked, and as he was
going to rise, he was astonished to see a good suit of clothes in the
room of his own, which were quite spoiled. "Certainly, (said he,) this
palace belongs to some kind fairy, who has seen and pitied my distress."
He looked through a window, but instead of snow saw the most delightful
arbours, interwoven with the most beautiful flowers that ever were
beheld.  He then returned to the great hall, where he had supped the
night before, and found some chocolate ready made on a little table.
"Thank you, good Madam Fairy, (said he aloud,) for being so careful as
to provide me a breakfast; I am extremely obliged to you for all your
favours."

The good man drank his chocolate, and then went to look for his horse;
but passing through an arbour of roses, he remembered Beauty's request
to him, and gathered a branch on which were several; immediately he
heard a great noise, and saw such a frightful beast coming towards him,
that he was ready to faint away.  "You are very ungrateful, (said the
beast to him, in a terrible voice) I have saved your life by receiving
you into my castle, and, in return, you steal my roses, which I value
beyond any thing in the universe; but you shall die for it; I give you
but a quarter of an hour to prepare yourself, to say your prayers." The
merchant fell on his knees, and lifted up both his hands: "My Lord (said
he,) I beseech you to forgive me, indeed I had no intention to offend in
gathering a rose for one of my daughters, who desired me to bring her
one."  "My name is not My Lord, (replied the monster,) but Beast; I
don't love compliments, not I; I like people should speak as they think;
and so do not imagine I am to be moved by any of your flattering
speeches; but you say you have got daughters; I will forgive you, on
condition that one of them come willingly, and suffer for you.  Let me
have no words, but go about your business, and swear that if your
daughter refuse to die in your stead, you will return within three
months."  The merchant had no mind to sacrifice his daughters to the
ugly monster, but he thought, in obtaining this respite, he should have
the satisfaction of seeing them once more; so he promised upon oath, he
would return, and the Beast told him he might set out when he pleased;
"but, (added he,) you shall not depart empty handed; go back to the room
where you lay, and you will see a great empty chest; fill it with
whatever you like best, and I will send it to your home," and at the
same time Beast withdrew.  "Well (said the good man to himself) if I
must die, I shall have the comfort, at least, of leaving something to my
poor children."

He returned to the bed-chamber, and finding a great quantity of broad
pieces of gold, he filled the great chest the Beast had mentioned,
locked it, and afterwards took his horse out of the stable, leaving the
palace with as much grief as he had entered it with joy.  The horse, of
his own accord, took one of the roads of the forest; and in a few hours
the good man was at home.  His children came around him, but, instead of
receiving their embraces with pleasure, he looked on them, and, holding
up the branch he had in his hands, he burst into tears. "Here, Beauty,
(said he,) take these roses; but little do you think how dear they are
like to cost your unhappy father; and then related his fatal adventure:
immediately the two eldest set up lamentable outcries, and said all
manner of ill-natured things to Beauty, who did not cry at all. "Do but
see the pride of that little wretch, (said they); she would not ask for
fine clothes, as we did; but no, truly, Miss wanted to distinguish
herself; so now she will be the death of our poor father, and yet she
does not so much as shed a tear."  "Why should I, (answered Beauty,) it
would be very needless, for my father shall not suffer upon my account,
since the monster will accept of one of his daughters, I will deliver
myself up to all his fury, and I am very happy in thinking that my death
will save my father's life, and be a proof of my tender love for him."
"No, sister, (said her three brothers,) that shall not be, we will go
find the monster, and either kill him, or perish in the attempt." "Do
not imagine any such thing, my sons, (said the merchant,) Beast's power
is so great, that I have no hopes of your overcoming him; I am charmed
with Beauty's kind and generous offer, but I cannot yield to it; I am
old, and have not long to live, so can only lose a few years, which I
regret for your sakes alone, my dear children."  "Indeed, father (said
Beauty), you shall not go to the palace without me, you cannot hinder me
from following you."  It was to no purpose all they could say, Beauty
still insisted on setting out for the fine palace; and her sisters were
delighted at it, for her virtue and amiable qualities made them envious
and jealous.

#scdbook comment [Illustration: Beauty Delivered up to the Beast]

The merchant was so afflicted at the thoughts of losing his daughter,
that he had quite forgot the chest full of gold; but at night, when he
retired to rest, no sooner had he shut his chamber-door, than, to his
great astonishment, he found it by his bedside; he was determined,
however, not to tell his children that he was grown rich, because they
would have wanted to return to town, and he was resolved not to leave
the country; but he trusted Beauty with the secret: who informed him,
that two gentlemen came in his absence, and courted her sisters; she
begged her father to consent to their marriage, and give them fortunes;
for she was so good, that she loved them, and forgave them heartily all
their ill-usage.  These wicked creatures rubbed their eyes with an
onion, to force some tears when they parted with their sister; but her
brothers were really concerned. Beauty was the only one who did not shed
tears at parting, because she would not increase their uneasiness.

The horse took the direct road to the palace; and towards evening they
perceived it illuminated as at first: the horse went of himself into the
stable, and the good man and his daughter came into the great hall,
where they found a table splendidly served up, and two covers.  The
merchant had no heart to eat; but Beauty endeavoured to appear cheerful,
sat down to table, and helped him.  Afterwards, thought she to herself,
"Beast surely has a mind to fatten me before he eats me, since he
provides such a plentiful entertainment."  When they had supped, they
heard a great noise, and the merchant, all in tears, bid his poor child
farewell, for he thought Beast was coming.  Beauty was sadly terrified
at his horrid form, but she took courage as well as she could, and the
monster having asked her if she came willingly; "y--e--s," said she,
trembling. "You are very good, and I am greatly obliged to you; honest
man, go your ways tomorrow morning, but never think of returning here
again.  Farewell, Beauty."  "Farewell, Beast," answered she; and
immediately the monster withdrew.  "Oh, daughter, (said the merchant,
embracing Beauty,) I am almost frightened to death; believe me, you had
better go back, and let me stay here."  "No, father, (said Beauty, in a
resolute tone,) you shall set out tomorrow morning, and leave me to the
care and protection of Providence."  They went to bed, and thought they
should not close their eyes all night; but scarce were they laid down,
than they fell fast asleep; and Beauty dreamed, a fine lady came, and
said to her, "I am content, Beauty, with your good will; this good
action of yours, in giving up your own life to save your father's, shall
not go unrewarded."  Beauty waked, and told her father her dream, and
though it helped to comfort him a little, yet he could not help crying
bitterly, when he took leave of his dear child.

As soon as he was gone, Beauty sat down in the great hall, and fell a
crying likewise; but as she was mistress of a great deal of resolution,
she recommended herself to God, and resolved not to be uneasy the little
time she had to live; for she firmly believed Beast would eat her up
that night.

However, she thought she might as well walk about till then, and view
this fine castle, which she could not help admiring; it was a delightful
pleasant place, and she was extremely surprised at seeing a door, over
which was wrote, "BEAUTY'S APARTMENT." She opened it hastily, and was
quite dazzled with the magnificence that reigned throughout; but what
chiefly took up her attention, was a large library, a harpsichord, and
several music books.  "Well, (said she to herself,) I see they will not
let my time hang heavy on my hands for want of amusement."  Then she
reflected, "Were I but to stay here a day, there would not have been all
these preparations." This consideration inspired her with fresh courage;
and opening the library, she took a book, and read these words in
letters of gold:--

/* "Welcome, Beauty, banish fear, You are queen and mistress here; Speak
your wishes, speak your will, Swift obedience meets them still." /*

"Alas, (said she, with a sigh,) there is nothing I desire so much as to
see my poor father, and to know what he is doing."  She had no sooner
said this, when casting her eyes on a great looking-glass, to her great
amazement she saw her own home, where her father arrived with a very
dejected countenance; her sisters went to meet him, and, notwithstanding
their endeavours to appear sorrowful, their joy, felt for having got rid
of their sister, was visible in every feature: a moment after, every
thing disappeared, and Beauty's apprehensions at this proof of Beast's
complaisance.

#scdbook comment [Illustration: Beauty Looking in the Glass]

At noon she found dinner ready, and while at table, was entertained with
an excellent concert of music, though without seeing any body: but at
night, as she was going to sit down to supper, she heard the noise Beast
made; and could not help being sadly terrified.  "Beauty, (said the
monster,) will you give me leave to see you sup?"  "That is as you
please," answered Beauty, trembling.  "No, (replied the Beast,) you
alone are mistress here; you need only bid me be gone, if my presence is
troublesome, and I will immediately withdraw: but tell me, do not you
think me very ugly?"  "That is true, (said Beauty,) for I cannot tell a
lie; but I believe you are very good-natured."  "So I am, (said the
monster,) but then, besides my ugliness, I have no sense; I know very
well that I am a poor, silly, stupid creature."  "'Tis no sign of folly
to think so, (replied Beauty,) for never did fool know this, or had so
humble a conceit of his own understanding." "Eat then, Beauty, (said the
monster,) and endeavour to amuse yourself in your palace; for every
thing here is yours, and I should be very uneasy if you were not happy."
"You are very obliging, (answered Beauty;) I own I am pleased with your
kindness, and when I consider that, your deformity scarce appears."
"Yes, yes, (said the Beast,) my heart is good, but still I am a
monster." "Among mankind, (says Beauty,) there are many that deserve
that name more than you, and I prefer you, just as your are, to those,
who, under a human form, hide a treacherous, corrupt, and ungrateful
heart."  "If I had sense enough, (replied the Beast,) I would make a
fine compliment to thank you, but I am so dull, that I can only say, I
am greatly obliged to you."  Beauty ate a hearty supper, and had almost
conquered her dread of the monster; but she had liked to have fainted
away, when he said to her, "Beauty, will you be my wife?"  She was some
time before she durst answer; for she was afraid of making him angry, if
she refused.  At last, however, she said, trembling, "No, Beast."
Immediately the poor monster began to sigh, and hissed so frightfully,
that the whole palace echoed.  But Beauty soon recovered her fright, for
Beast having said, in a mournful voice, "then farewell, Beauty," left
the room; and only turned back, now and then, to look at her as he went
out.

When Beauty was alone, she felt a great deal of compassion for poor
Beast.  "Alas, (said she,) 'tis a thousand pities any thing so good-
natured should be so ugly."

Beauty spent three months very contentedly in the palace: every evening
Beast paid her a visit, and talked to her during supper, very
rationally, with plain good common sense, but never with what the world
calls wit; and Beauty daily discovered some valuable qualifications in
the monster; and seeing him often, had so accustomed her to his
deformity, that, far from dreading the time of his visit, she would
often look on her watch to see when it would be nine; for the Beast
never missed coming at that hour. There was but one thing that gave
Beauty any concern, which was, that every night, before she went to bed,
the monster always asked her, if she would be his wife.  One day she
said to him, "Beast, you make me very uneasy, I wish I could consent to
marry you, but I am too sincere to make you believe that will ever
happen: I shall always esteem you as a friend; endeavour to be satisfied
with this." "I must, said the Beast, for, alas! I know too well my own
misfortune; but then I love you with the tenderest affection: however, I
ought to think myself happy that you will stay here; promise me never to
leave me."  Beauty blushed at these words; she had seen in her glass,
that her father had pined himself sick for the loss of her, and she
longed to see him again.  "I could, (answered she), indeed promise never
to leave you entirely, but I have so great a desire to see my father,
that I shall fret to death, if you refuse me that satisfaction."  "I had
rather die myself, (said the monster,) than give you the least
uneasiness: I will send you to your father, you shall remain with him,
and poor Beast will die with grief."  "No, (said Beauty, weeping,) I
love you too well to be the cause of your death: I give you my promise
to return in a week: you have shewn me that my sisters are married, and
my brothers gone to the army; only let me stay a week with my father, as
he is alone."  "You shall be there tomorrow morning, (said the Beast,)
but remember your promise: you need only lay your ring on the table
before you go to bed, when you have a mind to come back: farewell,
Beauty."  Beast sighed as usual, bidding her good night; and Beauty went
to bed very sad at seeing him so afflicted.  When she waked the next
morning, she found herself at her father's, and having rang a little
bell, that was by her bed-side, she saw the maid come; who, the moment
she saw her, gave a loud shriek; at which the good man ran up stairs,
and thought he should have died with joy to see his dear daughter again.
He held her fast locked in his arms above a quarter of an hour.  As soon
as the first transports were over, Beauty began to think of rising, and
was afraid she had no clothes to put on; but the maid told her, that she
had just found, in the next room, a large trunk full of gowns, covered
with gold and diamonds.  Beauty thanked good Beast for his kind care,
and taking one of the plainest of them, she intended to make a present
of the others to her sisters.  She scarce had said so, when the trunk
disappeared. Her father told her, that Beast insisted on her keeping
them herself; and immediately both gowns and trunk came back again.

#scdbook comment [Illustration: Beauty at Supper with the Beast]

Beauty dressed herself; and in the mean time they sent to her sisters,
who hasted thither with their husbands. They were both of them very
unhappy. The eldest had married a gentleman, extremely handsome indeed,
but so fond of his own person, that he was full of nothing but his own
dear self, and neglected his wife.  The second had married a man of wit,
but he only made use of it to plague and torment every body, and his
wife most of all. Beauty's sisters sickened with envy, when they saw her
dressed like a Princess, and more beautiful than ever; nor could all her
obliging affectionate behaviour stifle their jealousy, which was ready
to burst when she told them how happy she was.  They went down into the
garden to vent it in tears; and said one to the other, "In what is this
little creature better than us, that she should be so much happier?"
"Sister, said the eldest, a thought just strikes my mind; let us
endeavour to detain her above a week, and perhaps the silly monster will
be so enraged at her for breaking her word, that he will devour her."
"Right, sister, answered the other, therefore we must shew her as much
kindness as possible." After they had taken this resolution, they went
up, and behaved so affectionately to their sister, that poor Beauty wept
for joy.  When the week was expired, they cried and tore their hair, and
seemed so sorry to part with her, that she promised to stay a week
longer.

In the mean time, Beauty could not help reflecting on herself for the
uneasiness she was likely to cause poor Beast, whom she sincerely loved,
and really longed to see again.  The tenth night she spent at her
father's, she dreamed she was in the palace garden, and that she saw
Beast extended on the grass-plot, who seemed just expiring, and, in a
dying voice, reproached her with her ingratitude.  Beauty started out of
her sleep and bursting into tears, "Am not I very wicked, (said she) to
act so unkindly to Beast, that has studied so much to please me in every
thing?  Is it his fault that he is so ugly, and has so little sense?  He
is kind and good, and that is sufficient. Why did I refuse to marry him?
I should be happier with the monster than my sisters are with their
husbands; it is neither wit nor a fine person in a husband, that makes a
woman happy; but virtue, sweetness of temper, and complaisance: and
Beast has all these valuable qualifications.  It is true, I do not feel
the tenderness of affection for him, but I find I have the highest
gratitude, esteem, and friendship; and I will not make him miserable;
were I to be so ungrateful, I should never forgive myself."  Beauty
having said this, rose, put her ring on the table, and then laid down
again; scarce was she in bed before she fell asleep; and when she waked
the next morning, she was overjoyed to find herself in the Beast's
palace.  She put on one of her richest suits to please him, and waited
for evening with the utmost impatience; at last the wished-for hour
came, the clock struck nine, yet no Beast appeared.  Beauty then feared
she had been the cause of his death; she ran crying and wringing her
hands all about the palace, like one in despair; after having sought for
him every where, she recollected her dream, and flew to the canal in the
garden, where she dreamed she saw him.  There she found poor Beast
stretched out, quite senseless, and, as she imagined, dead.  She threw
herself upon him without any dread, and finding his heart beat still,
she fetched some water from the canal, and poured it on his head.  Beast
opened his eyes, and said to Beauty, "You forgot your promise, and I was
so afflicted for having lost you, that I resolved to starve myself; but
since I have the happiness of seeing you once more, I die satisfied."
"No, dear Beast, (said Beauty,) you must not die; live to be my husband;
from this moment I give you my hand, and swear to be none but yours.
Alas!  I thought I had only a friendship for you, but, the grief I now
feel convinces me, that I cannot live without you."  Beauty scarcely had
pronounced these words, when she saw the palace sparkle with light; and
fireworks, instruments of music, every thing, seemed to give notice of
some great event: but nothing could fix her attention; she turned to her
dear Beast, for whom she trembled with fear; but how great was her
surprise! Beast had disappeared, and she saw, at her feet, one of the
loveliest Princes that eye ever beheld, who returned her thanks for
having put an end to the charm, under which he had so long resembled a
Beast.  Though this Prince was worthy of all her attention, she could
not forbear asking where Beast was.  "You see him at your feet, (said
the Prince): a wicked fairy had condemned me to remain under that shape
till a beautiful virgin should consent to marry me: the fairy likewise
enjoined me to conceal my understanding; there was only you in the world
generous enough to be won by the goodness of my temper; and in offering
you my crown, I can't discharge the obligations I have to you." Beauty,
agreeably surprised, gave the charming Prince her hand to rise; they
went together into the castle, and Beauty was overjoyed to find, in the
great hall, her father and his whole family, whom the beautiful lady,
that appeared to her in her dream, had conveyed thither.

"Beauty, (said this lady,) come and receive the reward of your judicious
choice; you have preferred virtue before either wit or beauty, and
deserve to find a person in whom all these qualifications are united:
you are going to be a great Queen; I hope the throne will not lessen
your virtue, or make you forget yourself.  As to you, ladies, (said the
Fairy to Beauty's two sisters,) I know your hearts, and all the malice
they contain: become two statues; but, under this transformation, still
retain your reason.  You shall stand before your sister's palace gate,
and be it your punishment to behold her happiness; and it will not be in
your power to return to your former state till you own your faults; but
I am very much afraid that you will always remain statues.  Pride,
anger, gluttony, and idleness, are sometimes conquered, but the
conversion of a malicious and envious mind is a kind of miracle."
Immediately the fairy gave a stroke with her wand, and in a moment all
that were in the hall were transported into the Prince's palace.  His
subjects received him with joy; he married Beauty, and lived with her
many years; and their happiness, as it was founded on virtue, was
complete.


FINIS




